README.md, before:

# RAG Content

RAG Content provides a shared codebase for generating vector databases.
It serves as the core framework for Lightspeed-related projects (e.g., OpenShift
Lightspeed, OpenStack Lightspeed, etc.) to generate their own vector databases
that can be used for RAG.

## Installing the Python Library

The ``lightspeed_rag_content`` library is not available via pip, but it's included:
   - in the base [container image](#via-container-image) or
   - it can be installed [via UV](#via-uv).

### Via uv

To install the library via uv, do:

1. Run the command ``uv sync``

    ```bash
    uv sync
    ```

2. Test if the library can be imported (expect `lightspeed-rag-content` in the output):

    ```bash
    uv run python -c "import lightspeed_rag_content; print(lightspeed_rag_content.__name__)"
    ```

### Via Container Image

The base container image can be manually generated or pulled from a container
registry.

#### Prebuilt Image

There are prebuilt two images. One with CPU support only (size cca 3.7 GB) and image with GPU support with CUDA support (size cca 12 GB).

1. Pull the CPU variant:

    ```bash
    podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/rag-content-cpu:latest
    ```

2. Pull the GPU variant:

    ```bash
    podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/rag-content-gpu:latest
    ```
 
#### Build image locally

To build the image locally, follow these steps:

1. Install the requirements: `make` and `podman`.
2. Generate the container image:

    ```bash
    podman build -t localhost/lightspeed-rag-content-cpu:latest .
    ```

3. The `lightspeed_rag_content` and its dependencies will be installed in the
image (expect `lightspeed-rag-content` in the output):
    ```bash
    podman run localhost/lightspeed-rag-content-cpu:latest python -c "import lightspeed_rag_content; print(lightspeed_rag_content.__name__)"
    ```


## Generating the Vector Database

You can generate the vector database either using

1. [Llama-Index Faiss Vector Store](#faiss-vector-store)
2. [Llama-Index Postgres (PGVector) Vector Store](#postgres-pgvector-vector-store)
3. [Llama-Stack Faiss Vector-IO](#llama-stack-faiss)
4. [Llama-Stack SQLite-vec Vector-IO](#llama-stack-sqlite-vec)

Llama-Index approaches require you to download the embedding model, and we also
recommend it for Llama-Stack targets even though it should work even without
manually downloading the model, model-download.

All cases require you to prepare documentation in text format that is going to
be chunked and map to embeddings generated using the model:

1. Download the embedding model
([sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2))
from HuggingFace as follows:

    ```bash
   mkdir ./embeddings_model
   pdm run python ./scripts/download_embeddings_model.py -l ./embeddings_model/ -r sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2
    ```

2. Prepare dummy documentation:

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ./custom_docs/0.1
   echo "Vector Database is an efficient way how to provide information to LLM" > ./custom_docs/0.1/info.txt
   ```

3. Prepare a custom script (`./custom_processor.py`) for populating the vector
database. We provide an example of how such a script might look like using the
`lightspeed_rag_content` library. Note that in your case the script will be
different:

    ```python
    from lightspeed_rag_content.metadata_processor import MetadataProcessor
    from lightspeed_rag_content.document_processor import DocumentProcessor
    from lightspeed_rag_content import utils

    class CustomMetadataProcessor(MetadataProcessor):

        def __init__(self, url):
            self.url = url

        def url_function(self, file_path: str) -> str:
            # Return a URL for the file, so it can be referenced when used
            # in an answer
            return self.url

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        parser = utils.get_common_arg_parser()
        args = parser.parse_args()

        # Instantiate custom Metadata Processor
        metadata_processor = CustomMetadataProcessor("https://www.redhat.com")

        # Instantiate Document Processor
        document_processor = DocumentProcessor(
            chunk_size=args.chunk,
            chunk_overlap=args.overlap,
            model_name=args.model_name,
            embeddings_model_dir=args.model_dir,
            num_workers=args.workers,
            vector_store_type=args.vector_store_type,
        )

        # Load and embed the documents, this method can be called multiple times
        # for different sets of documents
        document_processor.process(args.folder, metadata=metadata_processor)

        # Save the new vector database to the output directory
        document_processor.save(args.index, args.output)
    ```

### Faiss Vector Store

Generate the documentation using the script from the previous section
([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
uv run ./custom_processor.py -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ -md embeddings_model/ -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 -i custom_docs-0_1
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database at `./vector_db`, the
embedding model at `./embeddings_model`, and the Index ID set to `custom-docs-0_1`.


### Postgres (PGVector) Vector Store

To generate a vector database stored in Postgres (PGVector), run the following
commands:

1. Start Postgres with the pgvector extension by running:

    ```bash
    make start-postgres-debug
    ```

    The `data` folder of Postgres is created at `./postgresql/data`. This command
    also creates `./output` for the output directory, in which the metadata is saved.

2. Run:

    ```bash
    POSTGRES_USER=postgres \
    POSTGRES_PASSWORD=somesecret \
    POSTGRES_HOST=localhost \
    POSTGRES_PORT=15432 \
    POSTGRES_DATABASE=postgres \
    uv run python ./custom_processor.py \
     -o ./output \
     -f custom_docs/0.1/ \
     -md embeddings_model/ \
     -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
     -i custom_docs-0_1 \
     --vector-store-type postgres
    ```

    Which generates embeddings on PostgreSQL, which can be used for RAG, and
    `metadata.json` in `./output`. Generated embeddings are stored in the
    `data_table_name` table.

    ```bash
    $ podman exec -it pgvector bash
    $ psql -U postgres
    psql (16.4 (Debian 16.4-1.pgdg120+2))
    Type "help" for help.

    postgres=# \dt
                     List of relations
     Schema |          Name          | Type  |  Owner
    --------+------------------------+-------+----------
     public | data_table_name        | table | postgres
    (1 row)
    ```

### Llama-Stack Faiss

The process is basically the same as in the
[Llama-Index Faiss Vector Store](#faiss-vector-store) but passing the
`--vector-store-type` parameter; so you generate the documentation using the
`custom_processor.py` script from earlier section
 ([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
pdm run ./custom_processor.py \
  -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ \
  -md embeddings_model/ \
  -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
  -i custom_docs-0_1 \
  --vector-store-type=llamastack-faiss
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database at
`./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1` with the name `faiss_store.db` as well as a
barebones llama-stack configuration file named `llama-stack.yaml` for
reference, since it's not necessary for the final deployment.

The vector-io will be named `custom-docs-0_1`:

```yaml
providers:
 vector_io:
   - provider_id: custom-docs-0_1
     provider_type: inline::faiss
     config:
       kvstore:
         type: sqlite
         namespace: null
         db_path: /home/<user>/rag-content/vector_db/custom_docs/0.1/faiss_store.db
```

Once we have a database we can use script `query_rag.py` to check some results:

```bash
python scripts/query_rag.py \
  -p vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -x custom-docs-0_1 \
  -m embeddings_model \
  -k 5 \
  -q "how can I configure a cinder backend"
```

### Llama-Stack SQLite-vec

The process is the same as in the
[Llama-Stack Faiss](#llama-stack-faiss) but passing a different value on the
`--vector-store-type` parameter; so you generate the documentation using the
`custom_processor.py` script from earlier section
 ([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
pdm run ./custom_processor.py \
  -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ \
  -md embeddings_model/ \
  -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
  -i custom_docs-0_1 \
  --vector-store-type=llamastack-sqlite-vec
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database at
`./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1` with the name `sqlitevec_store.db` as well as a
barebones llama-stack configuration file named `llama-stack.yaml` for
reference, since it's not necessary for the final deployment.

The vector-io will be named `custom-docs-0_1`:

```yaml
providers:
 vector_io:
   - provider_id: custom-docs-0_1
     provider_type: inline::sqlite-vec
     config:
       db_path: /home/<user>/rag-content/vector_db/custom_docs/0.1/sqlitevec_store.db
```

Once we have a database we can use script `query_rag.py` to check some results:

```bash
python scripts/query_rag.py \
  -p vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -x custom-docs-0_1 \
  -m embeddings_model \
  -k 5 \
  -q "how can I configure a cinder backend"
```

## Update lockfiles

The lock file is used in this repository:

```
uv.lock
```

The lock file needs to be regenerated when new updates (dependencies) are available. Use
following commands in order to do it:

```
uv lock --upgrade
uv sync
```

## `requirements*` Files Generation for Konflux

To generate all `requirements*` files:

```
requirements-build.in
requirements-build.txt
requirements.txt
```

The following command must be executed:

```bash
scripts/generate_packages_to_prefetch.py
```

# License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See the **LICENSE** file
for details.

Commit message:

Bump up to new llama-stack 0.3.x index creation

README.md, after:

# RAG Content

RAG Content provides a shared codebase for generating vector databases.
It serves as the core framework for Lightspeed-related projects (e.g., OpenShift
Lightspeed, OpenStack Lightspeed, etc.) to generate their own vector databases
that can be used for RAG.

## Installing the Python Library

The ``lightspeed_rag_content`` library is not available via pip, but it's included:
   - in the base [container image](#via-container-image) or
   - it can be installed [via UV](#via-uv).

### Via uv

To install the library via uv, do:

1. Run the command ``uv sync``

    ```bash
    uv sync
    ```

2. Test if the library can be imported (expect `lightspeed-rag-content` in the output):

    ```bash
    uv run python -c "import lightspeed_rag_content; print(lightspeed_rag_content.__name__)"
    ```

### Via Container Image

The base container image can be manually generated or pulled from a container
registry.

#### Prebuilt Image

There are prebuilt two images. One with CPU support only (size cca 3.7 GB) and image with GPU support with CUDA support (size cca 12 GB).

1. Pull the CPU variant:

    ```bash
    podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/rag-content-cpu:latest
    ```

2. Pull the GPU variant:

    ```bash
    podman pull quay.io/lightspeed-core/rag-content-gpu:latest
    ```
 
#### Build image locally

To build the image locally, follow these steps:

1. Install the requirements: `make` and `podman`.
2. Generate the container image:

    ```bash
    podman build -t localhost/lightspeed-rag-content-cpu:latest .
    ```

3. The `lightspeed_rag_content` and its dependencies will be installed in the
image (expect `lightspeed-rag-content` in the output):
    ```bash
    podman run localhost/lightspeed-rag-content-cpu:latest python -c "import lightspeed_rag_content; print(lightspeed_rag_content.__name__)"
    ```


## Generating the Vector Database

You can generate the vector database either using

1. [Llama-Index Faiss Vector Store](#faiss-vector-store)
2. [Llama-Index Postgres (PGVector) Vector Store](#postgres-pgvector-vector-store)
3. [Llama-Stack Faiss Vector-IO](#llama-stack-faiss)
4. [Llama-Stack SQLite-vec Vector-IO](#llama-stack-sqlite-vec)

Llama-Index approaches require you to download the embedding model, and we also
recommend it for Llama-Stack targets even though it should work even without
manually downloading the model, model-download.

All cases require you to prepare documentation in text format that is going to
be chunked and map to embeddings generated using the model:

1. Download the embedding model
([sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2))
from HuggingFace as follows:

    ```bash
   mkdir ./embeddings_model
   pdm run python ./scripts/download_embeddings_model.py -l ./embeddings_model/ -r sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2
    ```

2. Prepare dummy documentation:

   ```bash
   mkdir -p ./custom_docs/0.1
   echo "Vector Database is an efficient way how to provide information to LLM" > ./custom_docs/0.1/info.txt
   ```

3. Prepare a custom script (`./custom_processor.py`) for populating the vector
database. We provide an example of how such a script might look like using the
`lightspeed_rag_content` library. Note that in your case the script will be
different:

    ```python
    from lightspeed_rag_content.metadata_processor import MetadataProcessor
    from lightspeed_rag_content.document_processor import DocumentProcessor
    from lightspeed_rag_content import utils

    class CustomMetadataProcessor(MetadataProcessor):

        def __init__(self, url):
            self.url = url

        def url_function(self, file_path: str) -> str:
            # Return a URL for the file, so it can be referenced when used
            # in an answer
            return self.url

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        parser = utils.get_common_arg_parser()
        args = parser.parse_args()

        # Instantiate custom Metadata Processor
        metadata_processor = CustomMetadataProcessor("https://www.redhat.com")

        # Instantiate Document Processor
        document_processor = DocumentProcessor(
            chunk_size=args.chunk,
            chunk_overlap=args.overlap,
            model_name=args.model_name,
            embeddings_model_dir=args.model_dir,
            num_workers=args.workers,
            vector_store_type=args.vector_store_type,
        )

        # Load and embed the documents, this method can be called multiple times
        # for different sets of documents
        document_processor.process(args.folder, metadata=metadata_processor)

        # Save the new vector database to the output directory
        document_processor.save(args.index, args.output)
    ```

### Faiss Vector Store

Generate the documentation using the script from the previous section
([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
uv run ./custom_processor.py -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ -md embeddings_model/ -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 -i custom_docs-0_1
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database at `./vector_db`, the
embedding model at `./embeddings_model`, and the Index ID set to `custom-docs-0_1`.


### Postgres (PGVector) Vector Store

To generate a vector database stored in Postgres (PGVector), run the following
commands:

1. Start Postgres with the pgvector extension by running:

    ```bash
    make start-postgres-debug
    ```

    The `data` folder of Postgres is created at `./postgresql/data`. This command
    also creates `./output` for the output directory, in which the metadata is saved.

2. Run:

    ```bash
    POSTGRES_USER=postgres \
    POSTGRES_PASSWORD=somesecret \
    POSTGRES_HOST=localhost \
    POSTGRES_PORT=15432 \
    POSTGRES_DATABASE=postgres \
    uv run python ./custom_processor.py \
     -o ./output \
     -f custom_docs/0.1/ \
     -md embeddings_model/ \
     -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
     -i custom_docs-0_1 \
     --vector-store-type postgres
    ```

    Which generates embeddings on PostgreSQL, which can be used for RAG, and
    `metadata.json` in `./output`. Generated embeddings are stored in the
    `data_table_name` table.

    ```bash
    $ podman exec -it pgvector bash
    $ psql -U postgres
    psql (16.4 (Debian 16.4-1.pgdg120+2))
    Type "help" for help.

    postgres=# \dt
                     List of relations
     Schema |          Name          | Type  |  Owner
    --------+------------------------+-------+----------
     public | data_table_name        | table | postgres
    (1 row)
    ```

### Llama-Stack Vector Stores

#### Important: Embedding Model Path Portability

When using Llama-Stack vector stores (Faiss or SQLite-vec), the embedding model path
specified via the `-md` (or `--model-dir`) parameter is written into the generated
`llama-stack.yaml` configuration file as an absolute path. This path is also registered
in the llama-stack kv_store database.

When llama-stack later consumes the vector database, it reads the embedding model
location from the kv_store. Therefore, **the embedding model must be available at the
exact same path** that was specified during database creation.

**Recommendation:**
- Use absolute paths for the `-md` parameter to avoid ambiguity
  (e.g., `-md /app/embeddings` instead of `-md embeddings_model`).
- Alternatively, set `-md ''` (empty string) and use only the `-mn` flag with a
  HuggingFace model ID (e.g., `-md "" -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2`).
  Setting `-md` to empty forces the tool to use the HuggingFace model ID instead of
  checking for a local directory. This allows llama-stack to download the model from
  HuggingFace automatically, making the vector database fully portable without path
  dependencies.

### Llama-Stack Faiss

The process is basically the same as in the
[Llama-Index Faiss Vector Store](#faiss-vector-store) but passing the
`--vector-store-type` parameter; so you generate the documentation using the
`custom_processor.py` script from earlier section
 ([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
pdm run ./custom_processor.py \
  -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ \
  -md embeddings_model/ \
  -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
  -i custom_docs-0_1 \
  --vector-store-type=llamastack-faiss
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database (embedded with the registry metadata) at
`./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1` with the name `faiss_store.db` as well as a
barebones llama-stack configuration file named `llama-stack.yaml` for
reference, since it's not necessary for the final deployment.

A `files_metadata.db` will also be generated, containing metadata for `files`. This is needed to get file citations downstream (currently only way of embedding chunk metadata such as *url* and *title*).

The vector-io will be named `custom-docs-0_1`:

```yaml
providers:
 vector_io:
   - provider_id: custom-docs-0_1
     provider_type: inline::faiss
     config:
       kvstore:
         type: sqlite
         namespace: null
         db_path: /home/<user>/rag-content/vector_db/custom_docs/0.1/faiss_store.db
```

Once we have a database we can use script `query_rag.py` to check some results:

```bash
python scripts/query_rag.py \
  -p vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -x custom-docs-0_1 \
  -m embeddings_model \
  -k 5 \
  -q "how can I configure a cinder backend"
```

### Llama-Stack SQLite-vec

The process is the same as in the
[Llama-Stack Faiss](#llama-stack-faiss) but passing a different value on the
`--vector-store-type` parameter; so you generate the documentation using the
`custom_processor.py` script from earlier section
 ([Generating the Vector Database](#generating-the-vector-database)):

```bash
pdm run ./custom_processor.py \
  -o ./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -f ./custom_docs/0.1/ \
  -md embeddings_model/ \
  -mn sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2 \
  -i custom_docs-0_1 \
  --vector-store-type=llamastack-sqlite-vec
```

Once the command is done, you can find the vector database at
`./vector_db/custom_docs/0.1` with the name `sqlitevec_store.db` as well as a
barebones llama-stack configuration file named `llama-stack.yaml` for
reference, since it's not necessary for the final deployment.

The vector-io will be named `custom-docs-0_1`:

```yaml
providers:
 vector_io:
   - provider_id: custom-docs-0_1
     provider_type: inline::sqlite-vec
     config:
       db_path: /home/<user>/rag-content/vector_db/custom_docs/0.1/sqlitevec_store.db
```

Once we have a database we can use script `query_rag.py` to check some results:

```bash
python scripts/query_rag.py \
  -p vector_db/custom_docs/0.1 \
  -x custom-docs-0_1 \
  -m embeddings_model \
  -k 5 \
  -q "how can I configure a cinder backend"
```

## Update lockfiles

The lock file is used in this repository:

```
uv.lock
```

The lock file needs to be regenerated when new updates (dependencies) are available. Use
following commands in order to do it:

```
uv lock --upgrade
uv sync
```

## `requirements*` Files Generation for Konflux

To generate all `requirements*` files:

```
requirements-build.in
requirements-build.txt
requirements.txt
```

The following command must be executed:

```bash
scripts/generate_packages_to_prefetch.py
```

# License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See the **LICENSE** file
for details.
